Hello and welcome back to the course and Tablo in today's tutorial we will learn how to work with time
series daughter.
But first things first then go ahead and save a workbook.
We've already been to the data source and saving a workbook will prevent from loss of any progress that
we make along the way in the section.
So let's click save as and give our name.
In this case will be Section 3 for me.
Click save and now it's saved and all we have to do when we make changes is just press control s on
the keyboard and that will save our progress.
All right so now we're trying to visualize times used.
Let's have a look at our daughter first and understand what we're working with.
So for right click on the data source click view data you'll see that as we discussed we've got age
gender so two categories that we've got period and we've got an unemployment value for each row and
that's exactly what we want to visualize.
We want to see how unemployment is changing as period changes so we scroll down and we can see that
we have many months.
We've got a month for every single year or we got 12 months for every single year and we can see how
employment is changing.
So we want to visualize that.
So let's go ahead and do that.
What we're going to do is we're just going to double click on unemployed and then we're going to double
click on period and see how Tablo is very smart there.
It's automatically put unemployed into rows and it summed it up and it's put year or it's put period
into columns and it's taken the year of the period.
So what's going on here is there's some aggregation and we'll talk about aggregation more in the next
tutorial but it kind of makes sense already what is happening is tabel is taking all of the data that
it can see save for 2007.
And and it's summing it up all the values in all of the rows that have 2007 in them irrespective of
month of gender of age is just summing up and coming up with one single value for 2007.
Then the same thing for 2008 2009 and so on.
So that all makes sense.
But now we've kind of got a bit of a question here.
We know that our daughter has much much more granular than that.
We know that we have here months in every year and we have information for that.
Where how do we get to that level of granularity.
Well let's go ahead and explore that.
If we go to the dropdown here which you can see for this dimension and we click it you'll see that there's
two sections in China which are responsible for time.
There's this section which has Year Quarter month day.
And then there's this section which also has Year Quarter month week and day.
What's the difference between the two.
Well to find that out let's click on month in the first section and right away you can see how we no
longer have years at the bottom instead of that we have instead of that we have months and what happened
there.
Well the other thing that we can also see is that we have only one January and only one February and
only one June.
We know that in our data we have many jeunes and many Februarys we have one in fact we have one for
every single year.
But in this case we were only presented with one of each month.
So we only have 12 points on this chart.
And what is going on.
Well what is happening is Tablo is taking all of the data from our data source which has let's say for
instance may for any any roll that has me in it.
It will take it and aggregate it to this value.
So it will add them up irrespective of age gender and even year.
And for that for us that doesn't make any sense what's the point of adding up unemployment for 2005
2006 2007 and so on come out for a number that number has no meaning to us as a why is that happening.
Well the reason is is because in this case Tablo is recognizing recognizing month as a dimension and
how can we tell that well Talos giving us a hint up here you can see that month of period is being highlighted
in blue.
So Tablo always highlights dimensions and blue and measures in green.
And so that tells us that trouble is recognizing this new variable because in essence it is a new variable
with our variable in the data source is called period.
We don't have a peer.
We don't have a variable that is called month but tabel is creating a calculation here and you can double
click on it and see what the formula is so taboo is creating a calculation which is month of period.
And in essence that's the new variable and Tablo is recognizing this new variable as a dimension.
And that means it will treat it just as it would treat age or sorry just as it would treat gender or
in our case age because we have age groups.
But let's let's think of it as a gender so tabel is treating this new variable as a categorical variable.
It only has 12 categories and it's putting the data into those categories.
Well obviously in this case we don't want that we don't want different categories of months.
We actually want a timeline over here at the bottom.
So how do we get that.
Well instead of this month let's go ahead and select the second month over here in this dropdown and
right away you can see that our chart changed.
And also you can see that now month of period is green.
So this variable this time is being recognized as a measure.
So if it were a calculated variable it would be sitting over here.
And what then happens now is that we have a timeline at the bottom and we have all of the months we've
all of the data that we are looking for and this is exactly what we wanted.
So just to see the difference.
Let's click again and we'll select year instead of month.
So here you can see a similar chart to what we had before.
So I'll just bring that up here you can see very similar line but here you've got categories of years.
But if we click this year at the bottom here then here you've got these sort of categories of years.
You've got a timeline.
And the only difference with the month timeline is that there's less dots on this timeline.
And in fact you can see the dots a few in line if you click on color and you select this option you'll
actually see the dots here.
So you have less dots on this timeline and all we are doing by changing this level here is we're changing
the granularity of this specific timeline so we're just saying we want more dots on the timeline.
We're not changing the category that we're grouping observations into we're changing the granularity
of our timeline or the number of ticks on the timeline.
And if we change month there we go so we're also once again we're changing the Iran-Iraq granularity
of our timeline.
So just changes back to normal.
And that's exactly what we want so you have to be careful of that.
And that's an important part of working time series data that you need to understand what you want from
your time data whether you want it to be a dimension or a category or whether you want it to be a measure.
In this case we wanted obviously to be a measure so we can plot a timeline like this.
So that's pretty much it for today.
But before we go what I wanted to do is I wanted to show you how you can validate this chart.
So this is unemployment daughter for the U.S. And obviously it's publicly available so you can just
go to Google and look for unemployment and 27 weeks is long term unemployment we're looking at long
term unemployment 27 weeks.
And then just type in Fred and Fred stands for Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
So if you go here you'll see a very similar chart.
And well here I can change it to 2005 so you can see that looks a lot like our chart.
The only question we've got we can just look at the tip here and see six thousand eight hundred.
And in our chart it's seven thousand one hundred or seven million 100000 so it's of course you'll have
a bit over a discrepancy if you have data from different data sources.
In this case it's about 300000 but the way you like I look at it if it's statistical data so it's 300000
in divided over 6800.
So that's less than 5 percent difference.
And for what we're doing for our purposes that will be a sufficient level of precision and you can see
that the charts are quite similar.
So we are working with actual unemployment daughter in the US for this period of time.
OK so that's us for today and next time we will be talking about aggregation granularity and level of
detail so I look forward to seeing in the next tutorial will be a very important one.
And until then happy analyzing.